# DIA 2. Variant calling

**Servicio de Análisis Biocomputacional (SABio); CBM** \
**Edition**: April, 2026 \
**Last update**: 27/04/2026

## Introduction to variant calling analysis

Variant calling analysis, also called resequencing, is the process of identifying genomic differences by aligning sequencing reads against an existing reference genome. Unlike de novo assembly, where the genome must be reconstructed from overlapping reads, resequencing relies on a previously characterized genome to guide the analysis. Sequencing reads, typically generated by platforms such as Illumina, are mapped to the reference sequence in order to detect variants including single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), insertions, and deletions. This approach enables accurate characterization of genetic variation, facilitates comparison between samples, and provides the basis for downstream analyses such as variant filtering, functional annotation, and the identification of mutations associated with specific phenotypes.

## Project Background

In this session, we will analyze sequencing reads from *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* strains in order to identify genomic variants associated with antibiotic resistance.

Two sequencing datasets are available:

- **ERR023195** → sensitive to isoniazid and rifampicin
- **ERR023197** → resistant to isoniazid and rifampicin

By aligning the reads against the *Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv* reference genome and performing variant calling, we will identify sequence differences that may explain the resistance phenotype.

## 0. Environment setup

Load the conda environment **Dia2**, which contains all the tools required for the variant calling workflow, except the annotation software snpEff. This tool will require the activation of another environment later. For checking which software is available in this environment you can run `conda list`.

```bash
conda activate Dia2

# Create working directory
mkdir /home/curso/dia2
cd /home/curso/dia2
```

## 1. Data adquisition

### 1.1. Sequencing reads

Sequencing reads for the two samples can be downloaded from the ENA project PRJEB2371.

```bash
# Sensitive strain
wget ftp://ftp.sra.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/ERR023/ERR023195/ERR023195_1.fastq.gz
wget ftp://ftp.sra.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/ERR023/ERR023195/ERR023195_2.fastq.gz

# Resistant strain
wget ftp://ftp.sra.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/ERR023/ERR023197/ERR023197_1.fastq.gz
wget ftp://ftp.sra.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/fastq/ERR023/ERR023197/ERR023197_2.fastq.gz

#Change to more descriptive names
mv ERR023195_1.fastq.gz > sensitive_1.fastq.gz
mv ERR023195_2.fastq.gz > sensitive_2.fastq.gz

mv ERR023197_1.fastq.gz > resistant_1.fastq.gz
mv ERR023197_2.fastq.gz > resistant_2.fastq.gz
```

### 1.2. Reference genome

The reference genome of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv* will be used for alignment and variant detection. For this session, it will be downloaded from ENSEMBL database, however there are multiple sources that can be used such as NCBI. 

```bash
#Download the genome
wget ftp://ftp.ensemblgenomes.ebi.ac.uk/pub/bacteria/release-62/fasta/bacteria_15_collection/mycobacterium_tuberculosis_h37rv_gca_000195955/dna/Mycobacterium_tuberculosis_h37rv_gca_000195955.ASM19595v2.dna.toplevel.fa.gz

#Decompress the file
gunzip Mycobacterium_tuberculosis_h37rv_gca_000195955.ASM19595v2.dna.toplevel.fa.gz

#In order to make the analysis easier, we change the name of the file to a shorter name
mv Mycobacterium_tuberculosis_h37rv_gca_000195955.ASM19595v2.dna.toplevel.fa mtu.fasta
```

## 2.  Quality check with fastqc

Raw sequencing data must be evaluated before alignment to detect potential issues such as low-quality bases, adapter contamination, or biased nucleotide composition.

FastQC generates individual quality reports for each FASTQ file, while MultiQC summarizes all reports into a single interactive report.

```bash
fastqc *.fastq.gz 
multiqc ./
```

## 3.  Read alignment to the reference genome

Read alignment maps sequencing reads onto the reference genome.
For this purpose, we use BWA-MEM, an efficient aligner based on the Burrows-Wheeler Transform (BWT), particularly suitable for short Illumina reads.

## 3.1 Index the reference genome

Before aligning sequencing reads, the reference genome must be indexed. This process creates auxiliary files that allow the aligner to efficiently search and map reads to the reference sequence.

In this step, **BWA** builds an index of the reference genome using the Burrows-Wheeler Transform (BWT). The option *-p* indicates a prefix for the index files.

```bash
bwa index -p mtu mtu.fasta
```

## 3.2 Align reads

Once the reference genome is indexed, sequencing reads can be aligned against it.

This step maps each read to its most likely position in the reference genome using **BWA-MEM**, generating a **SAM** file that stores the alignment information for every read.

```bash
# Sensitive strain
bwa mem mtu.fasta sensitive_1.fastq.gz sensitive_2.fastq.gz > sensitive.sam
# Resistant strain
bwa mem mtu.fasta resistant_1.fastq.gz resistant_2.fastq.gz > resistant.sam
```

To simplify the analysis of multiple samples, repetitive commands can be automated using a **for loop** in bash. This allows the same alignment and post-processing steps to be applied sequentially to each sample, reducing manual repetition and minimizing the risk of errors.

```bash
for sample in sensitive resistant
do
  bwa mem mtu.fasta ${sample}_1.fastq.gz ${sample}_2.fastq.gz > ${sample}.sam
done
```

## 3.3 Convert, sort and index BAM files

SAM files are plain text and can be very large. To improve efficiency, they are converted to **BAM**, a compressed binary version of the same information.

After conversion, BAM files are sorted according to genomic coordinates and indexed, allowing rapid access to alignments in specific genomic regions during downstream analyses.

```bash

for sample in sensitive resistant
do
  samtools view -bS ${sample}.sam > ${sample}.bam
  samtools sort ${sample}.bam -o ${sample}_sorted.bam
  samtools index ${sample}_sorted.bam
done
```

## 4. Coverage Analysis and Visualization

Coverage analysis measures sequencing depth across the reference genome and helps detect uneven sequencing or poorly covered regions. 

Using **bedtools genomecov**, we obtain per-position coverage. The resulting coverage files can be visualized in R to inspect coverage distribution along the genome.

```bash
genomeCoverageBed -ibam sensitive_sorted.bam -g mtu.fasta -d > sensitive_coverage.cov
genomeCoverageBed -ibam resistant_sorted.bam -g mtu.fasta -d > resistant_coverage.cov
```
The sorted alignment files in BAM format can also be visualized with genomic browsers such as IGV (Integrative Genomic Viewer). 

## 5 Alignment Preprocessing

Before calling variants, alignments are processed to improve accuracy. All the steps can be performed with **Picard tools**. The preprocessing includes:

 - Marking PCR duplicates which can bias variant calling (tool: *picard MarkDuplicates*).
 - Assigning read groups, which store metadata about the sample and are required by GATK. (tool: *picard AddOrReplaceReadGroups*)
 - Indexing BAM files so they can be processed by other software and browsers. (tool: *picard BuildBamIndex*)
 
```bash
for sample in sensitive resistant
do
  picard MarkDuplicates I=${sample}_sorted.bam O=${sample}_dup.bam METRICS_FILE=${sample}_metrics.txt
  picard AddOrReplaceReadGroups I=${sample}_dup.bam O=${sample]_readgroup.bam RGID=1 RGSM=1 RGLB=lib1 RGPU=unit1 RGPL=illumina
  picard BuildBamIndex I=${sample}_readgroup.bam
done
```

## 6. Variant Calling

Once the alignments have been processed, the next step is to identify the genomic positions where the sequenced samples differ from the reference genome. This process is known as **variant calling**.

Variant calling analyzes the aligned reads at each genomic position and evaluates whether the observed nucleotides support the presence of a variant, such as:

- **single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)**, where one base differs from the reference,
- **insertions**, where extra bases are present in the sample,
- **deletions**, where bases are missing compared to the reference.

In this workflow, variant calling is performed using **GATK HaplotypeCaller**, one of the most widely used tools for identifying genomic variants.

Since *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* is a haploid organism, the parameter `-ploidy 1` is used so the software assumes one allele per genomic position.

```bash
for sample in sensitive resistant
do
    gatk HaplotypeCaller -R mtu.fasta -I ${sample}_readgroup.bam -O ${sample}.vcf -ploidy 1
done
```

The output is a **VCF file (Variant Call Format)**, which contains:

- the genomic position of each detected variant,
- the reference allele,
- the alternative allele,
- quality statistics,
- depth of coverage and additional metrics describing confidence in the call.

## 7. Variant filtering

The raw variants detected may include false positives, caused by sequencing errors, alignment artifacts, or low-confidence positions. To improve the reliability of the results, the variants are filtered according to quality criteria. Two of the most common metrics are:

 - **DP (Depth)**: the number of reads supporting the variant position
 - **QUAL (Quality)**: the confidence score assigned to the variant call

This filtering step is performed using **vcffilter**, which reads the VCF file and retains only the variants that pass the defined thresholds.

```bash
for sample in ERR023195 ERR023197
do
    vcffilter -f "DP > 9 & QUAL > 10" ${sample}.vcf > ${sample}_filtered.vcf
done
```

## 8. Variant Annotation

After identifying and filtering the variants, the next step is to determine their possible biological impact. This process is called variant annotation, and its purpose is to add functional information to each detected variant, such as whether the variant is located inside a gene or the predicted impact on protein function.

To perform this analysis, we use **SnpEff**, a tool that annotates variants based on genome annotation databases.

First, activate the conda environment that contains SnpEff:

```bash
conda activate Dia2_snpeff
```
SnpEff compares the filtered variants against the annotation database of the reference genome and predicts their functional effects.

```bash
#Check the proper reference in snpEff database and donwloaded if necessary
snpEff databases | grep "Mycobacterium_tuberculosis_h37rv"
snpeff download Mycobacterium_tuberculosis_h37rv

#Annotate the filtered variants
for sample in ERR023195 ERR023197
do
  snpEff Mycobacterium_tuberculosis_h37rv ${sample}_filtered.vcf > ${sample}_annotated.vcf
done
```
The annotation is added to the VCF file, producing a new annotated VCF that includes information such as:

 - affected gene name,
 - coding effect,
 - amino acid change,
 - predicted impact level.

The resulting annotated VCF files can then be explored to identify mutations that may explain the phenotypic differences between the sensitive and resistant strains.
