

# DIA 1. De novo Assembly

**Servicio de Análisis Biocomputacional (SABio); CBM** \
**Edition**: April, 2026 \
**Last update**: 08/04/2026

## Introduction to assembly

Genome assembly is the process of reconstructing a genome sequence from shorter DNA fragments (reads) generated by sequencing technologies. Depending on the sequencing platform, reads can vary in length and error rate. Short reads, such as those produced by Illumina sequencing, are highly accurate but limited in length, while long reads, such as those generated by Oxford Nanopore Technologies (ONT), can span repetitive regions but typically have higher error rates. Combining these data types or analyzing them independently allows for the reconstruction of genome sequences and the evaluation of assembly quality.

## Project Background

In this project, we aim to assemble and evaluate the genome of Escherichia coli using both Illumina short reads and ONT long reads. 
The availability of sequencing data from different technologies enables comparison of assembly strategies and assessment of their impact on genome contiguity and accuracy. Additionally, when a reference genome is available, it can be used as a benchmark to evaluate the quality of the generated assembly and to identify potential differences or errors.


## 0. Environment setup

Load the conda environment "Dia1". This environment has installed a set of tools that we will use at different steps in the practice. For checking which software is available in this environment you can run `conda list`.


```bash
# Create a new folder to store the data from today's practice
mkdir /home/curso/dia1
```

## 1. Data adquisition

### 1.1. Sequencing reads (FASTQ files)

To save time, FASTQ files for these samples were downloaded. ENA project: PRJEB2038 for Illumina reads and ENA project: PRJEB9088 for ONT longreads


```bash
#Illumina reads
wget ftp://ftp.sra.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/run/ERR008/ERR008613/200x100x100-081224_EAS20_0008_FC30TBBAAXX-6.tar.gz
tar -xzf 200x100x100-081224_EAS20_0008_FC30TBBAAXX-6.tar.gz
mv EAS20_8/* ./
rm -rf EAS20_8/

wget https://sra-pub-run-odp.s3.amazonaws.com/sra/ERR968959/ERR968959
fastq-dump ERR968959
```


### 1.2. Reference genome
#Ref: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NC_000913.3?report=fasta

When a reference genome is available, it can be downloaded and used for downstream comparative analyses. In this case, the reference genome of Escherichia coli str. K-12 substr. MG1655 (accession NC_000913.3) was retrieved from the NCBI database to enable comparison with the assembled genome.


## 2.  Quality check with fastqc

Raw sequencing data (FASTQ files) is assessed for quality using tools like FastQC and MultiQC. This step detects issues such as adapter contamination, low-quality reads, or GC bias before continuing with further analysis.

```bash
fastqc *.fastq 
multiqc ./
```


## 3.   De novo assembly

Genome assembly is a fundamental process in genomics that aims to reconstruct the complete sequence of an organism's DNA from raw sequencing reads. Modern sequencing technologies do not produce entire chromosomes in a single piece; instead, they generate millions of short or long DNA fragments that must be computationally reassembled.

There are two major strategies for genome reconstruction:

    - Reference-guided assembly (resequencing) : Reads are aligned against a previously characterized genome. While efficient, this strategy inherently introduces reference bias and may mask novel regions absent from the reference.
    - De novo assembly: The genome is inferred exclusively from sequencing data, without relying on any pre-existing reference sequence. Similar to assembling a puzzle without the image on the box, this approach requires sophisticated algorithms to determine how fragments overlap and fit together. De novo assembly is indispensable when working with non-model organisms, highly variable genomes, or species lacking well-curated references.
    

```bash
unicycler -l ERR968959.fastq -t 24 -o ONT_ecoli
unicycler -1 s_6_1.fastq -2 s_6_2.fastq -t 24 -o Illumina_ecoli
unicycler -1 s_6_1.fastq -2 s_6_2.fastq -l ERR968959.fastq -t 24 -o hybrid_ecoli
```

## 3.   Comparison validation

Assembly quality was evaluated using QUAST, which provides key assembly metrics including N50, number of contigs, total genome size, and GC content.


```bash
quast -t 4 -r Ecoli_k12_mg1655.fasta illumina_assembly.fasta ONT_assembly.fasta hybrid_assembly.fasta
quast -t 4 Ecoli_k12_mg1655.fasta illumina_assembly.fasta ONT_assembly.fasta hybrid_assembly.fasta
```


## 3. Reads alignment to the reference genome

We can map (or align) the reads to all the assemblies. There are many tools available for performing this step (BWA, Bowtie2...)

For the alignment we will need the sequence of the genome (FASTA).

```bash

bwa index ONT_assembly.fasta

bwa mem ONT_assembly.fasta s_6_1.fastq s_6_2.fastq > aln_mem_illumina_vs_ONT.sam
samtools view -bS aln_mem_illumina_vs_ONT.sam > aln_mem_illumina_vs_ONT.bam
samtools sort  aln_mem_illumina_vs_ONT.bam -o aln_mem_illumina_vs_ONTassembly_sorted.bam
samtools index aln_mem_illumina_vs_ONTassembly_sorted.bam
rm aln_mem_illumina_vs_ONT.sam aln_mem_illumina_vs_ONT.bam


bwa index ONT_assembly.fasta

bwa mem ONT_assembly.fasta ERR968959.fastq > aln_mem_ONT_vs_ONTassembly.sam
samtools view -bS aln_mem_ONT_vs_ONTassembly.sam > aln_mem_ONT_vs_ONTassembly.bam
samtools sort  aln_mem_ONT_vs_ONTassembly.bam -o aln_mem_ONT_vs_ONTassembly_sorted.bam
samtools index aln_mem_ONT_vs_ONTassembly_sorted.bam
rm aln_mem_ONT_vs_ONTassembly.sam aln_mem_ONT_vs_ONTassembly.bam



```

## 4. Coverage plot

Sequencing depth across the genome was calculated using samtools (samtools depth), generating per-base coverage values for each position in the assembly. The -a option was used to include positions with zero coverage, allowing a complete representation of coverage distribution. These data were then used to visualize coverage profiles along the genome.

```bash
samtools depth -a aln_mem_illumina_vs_ONTassembly_sorted.bam > depth_illumina_vs_ONT.cov
samtools depth -a aln_mem_ONT_vs_ONTassembly_sorted.bam > depth_ONT_vs_ONTassembly.cov


Rscript --vanilla coveragePlot.R depth_ONT_vs_ONTassembly.cov depth_illumina_vs_ONT.cov grafico_cobertura_${contig}.png
```


## 5.  Annotation

Genome annotation was performed using Prokka, which predicts coding sequences (CDSs), rRNAs, tRNAs, and other genomic features based on curated databases. The annotation was configured for bacterial genomes, specifying the genus and species to improve annotation accuracy.

```bash
prokka --kingdom Bacteria --genus Escherichia --species coli --gcode 11 --usegenus --prefix ecoli ONT_assembly.fasta
```
